# Chapter 08 Additional Topics

## 8.2 Metric Spaces and the Baire Category Theorem

### Definition 8.2.1.

Given a set $X$, a function $d : X × X → R$ is a metric on $X$
if for all $x,y ∈ X$:

(i) $d(x,y) ≥ 0$ with $d(x,y) = 0$ if and only if $x = y$,

(ii) $d(x,y) = d(y,x)$, and

(iii) for all $z ∈ X$, $d(x,y) ≤ d(x,z)+d(z,y)$.

A metric space is a set $X$ together with a metric 
$d$.

### Exercise 8.2.1.

Decide which of the following are metrics on
$X = R^2$. For each, we let $x = (x_1,x_2)$ and
$y = (y_1,y_2)$ be points in the plane.

(a) $d(x,y) = \sqrt[]{(x_1−y_1)^2 +(x_2−y_2)^2}$.

**Proof**: Yes.

(i)

$$ 
\sqrt[]{(x_1−y_1)^2 +(x_2−y_2)^2} \geq 0
$$

It's equal to $0$, only when $x_1 = y_1, x_2 = y_2$.

(ii) yes.

(iii) Yes. It's easier to see with a plot.
Triangle 2 edges are longer than 1 edge.

$\square$

(b) $d(x,y) = \max \{|x_1−y_1|,|x_2−y_2|\}.$

(i) yes.

(ii) yes.

(iii)

$$ 
d(x, z) + d(z,y) =
\max \{|x_1 - z_1|,|x_2 - z_2|\} +
\max \{|y_1 - z_1|,|y_2 - z_2|\} \\
\geq
\max \{
|x_1 - z_1| + |y_1 - z_1|,
|x_2 - z_2| + |y_2 - z_2|
\} \\
\geq
\max \{
|x_1 - y_1|,
|x_2 - y_2|
\} = d(x,y)
$$

$\square$

(c) $d(x,y) = |x_1 x_2 +y_1 y_2|$.

(i) No, Consider $x = (1, 1), y = (1, -1)$.
$x_1 x_2 +y_1 y_2 = 0$.

$\square$

### Exercise 8.2.2.

Let $C[0,1]$ be the collection of continuous functions
on the closed interval $[0,1]$. Decide which of the following are metrics on $C[0,1]$.

(a) $d(f,g) = \sup \{|f(x)−g(x)| : x ∈ [0,1]\}$.

**Proof**:

(i) $d(f,g) \geq 0$. If $d(f,g) = 0$, then
$\sup \{|f(x)−g(x)| : x ∈ [0,1]\} = 0$, that means
$|f(x) - g(x)| = 0$ for all $x \in [0,1]$.

(ii) $d(f,g) = d(g,f)$

(iii)

$$ 
d(f,h) + d(h, g) =
\sup \{|f(x)−h(x)| : x ∈ [0,1]\} +
\sup \{|h(x)−g(x)| : x ∈ [0,1]\} \\
\geq
\sup \{
|f(x)−h(x)| + |h(x)−g(x)| : x ∈ [0,1]
\} \\
\geq
\sup \{
|f(x)−g(x)| : x ∈ [0,1]
\} \\
= d(f,g)
$$

So yes.

$\square$

(b) $d(f,g) = |f(1)−g(1)|$.

(i) it does not hold. So it's not a metric.

$\square$

(c) $d(f,g) = \int_{0}^{1} |f-g|$

(i) $\int_{0}^{1} |f-g| \geq 0$. If $\int_{0}^{1} |f-g| = 0$,
since $f, g$ are continuous functions,
then $f-g = 0$, i.e. $f = g$.

(ii) $\int_{0}^{1} |f-g| = \int_{0}^{1} |g-f|$

(iii)

$$
\int_{0}^{1} |f - g| \leq
\int_{0}^{1} |f-h| + |h-g|
=
\int_{0}^{1} |f-h| + \int_{0}^{1} |h - g|
= d(f,h) + d(h, g)
$$

So yes.

The following distance function is called the discrete metric and 
can be defined on any set $X$. For any $x,y ∈ X$, let

$$ 
ρ(x,y) =
\begin{cases}
    1 &\text{if } x \neq y\\
    0 &\text{if } x = y \\
\end{cases} 
$$

### Exercise 8.2.3.

Verify that the discrete metric is actually a metric.

**Proof**:

(i) $d(x,y) \geq 0$. Also if $d(x,y) = 0$, then $x = y$.

(ii) if $x = y$, then $d(x,y) = d(x, x) = 0 = d(y, y) = d(y,x)$.

If $x \neq y$, then $d(x,y) = 1 = d(y,x)$.

(iii) $d(x,y) \leq 1$, $d(x,z) + d(z,y) \geq 1$,
$d(x,y) \leq d(x,z) + d(z,y)$.

$\square$

### Definition 8.2.2.

Let $(X,d)$ be a metric space. A sequence $(x_n) ⊆ X$ converges
to an element $x ∈ X$ if for all $ϵ > 0$ there exists an $N ∈ \mathbf{N}$ such that $d(x_n,x) < ϵ$ whenever $n ≥ N$.

### Definition 8.2.3.

A sequence $(x_n)$ in a metric space $(X,d)$ is a Cauchy sequence
if for all $ϵ > 0$ there exists an $N ∈ \mathbf{N}$ such that
$d(x_m,x_n) < ϵ$ whenever $m,n ≥ N$.

### Exercise 8.2.4.

Show that a convergent sequence is Cauchy.

**Proof**:

$$ 
d(x_m,x_n) \leq d(x_m,x) + (x,x_n) \leq \epsilon /2 + \epsilon /2
= \epsilon
$$ 

$\square$

### Definition 8.2.4.

A metric space $(X,d)$ is complete if every Cauchy sequence
in $X$ converges to an element of $X$.

### Exercise 8.2.5.

(a) Consider $\mathbf{R}^2$ with the discrete metric $ρ(x,y)$ 
examined in Exercise 8.2.3. What do Cauchy sequences look like in 
this space? Is $\mathbf{R}^2$ complete with respect to this metric?

**Proof**: Cauchy sequences will eventually become a constant.
Yes, it's complete.

(b) Show that $C[0,1]$ is complete with respect to the metric in Exercise 8.2.2 (a).

**Proof**:

Given a cauchy function sequence $(f_n(x))$,
and given $\epsilon$, we can find $N$, and $m,n > N$,
$d(f_m, f_n) < \epsilon$.

Since $d(f_m, f_n) = \sup \{|f_m(x) - f_n(x)| : x \in [0,1]\}$,
then $|f_m(x) - f_n(x)| < \epsilon$ for $x \in [0,1]$.
Then we can apply Theorem 6.2.5 (Cauchy Criterion for Uniform Convergence), to get $f(x)$ is also continuous.
Then $f(x) \in C[0,1]$.

$\square$

(c) Define $C^1[0,1]$ to be the collection of diﬀerentiable 
functions on $[0,1]$ whose derivatives are also continuous. Is
$C^1[0,1]$ complete with respect to the metric defined in Exercise 
8.2.2 (a)?

**Proof**:

Let's consider the following function sequence we encounter
in the end of chapter 5.4

$$ 
f_n(x) = \sum_{k = 0}^{n} (\frac{1}{2})^k \cos (2^k x)
$$

where $x \in [0,1]$.

This is a Cauchy sequence, because

$$ 
\left| f_m(x) - f_n(x) \right| \leq 
\left| 
(\frac{1}{2})^{m+1} + \cdots + (\frac{1}{2})^n
 \right| < \frac{1}{2^m}
$$

So it converges uniformly to a function $f$ which is continuous.

However, from the discussion at the end of chapter 5.4, the results
from G.H. Hardy show since $ab = (\frac{1}{2}) \cdot 2 = 1$, then
$f(x)$ is a nowhere-differentiable function. That is
$f \not\in C^1[0,1]$. So it's not complete w.r.t.
to the metric defined in Exercise 8.2.2 (a).

Another example I asked Google AI mode is similar to
exercise 8.5.4 (b), which uses $\sin$ and $\cos$ function
to approximate $f(x) = |x|$. Again, the convergence is uniform,
(see my solution on that one),
so it's a Cauchy sequence, but $|x|$ is not differentiable at 0.

$\square$

Because completeness is a prerequisite for doing anything 
significant in the way of analysis, the metric in Exercise
8.2.2 (a) is the most natural metric to
consider when working with $C[0,1]$. The notation

$$ 
\left\| f-g \right\|_{\infty} =
d(f,g) = \sup \{|f(x)−g(x)| : x ∈ [0,1]\}
$$

is standard, and setting $g = 0$ gives the so-called “sup norm”

$$ 
\left\| f \right\|_{\infty} =
d(f,0) = \sup \{|f(x)| : x ∈ [0,1]\}
$$

In all upcoming discussions, it is assumed that the space $C[0,1]$ 
is endowed with this metric unless otherwise specified.

### Definition 8.2.5 (Continuous function).

Let $(X,d_1)$ and $(Y,d_2)$ be metric spaces. A function $f :
X → Y$ is continuous at $x ∈ X$ if for all $ϵ > 0$ there exists a 
$δ > 0$ such that $d_2(f(x),f(y)) < ϵ$ whenever $d_1(x,y) < δ$.

### Exercise 8.2.6.

Which of these functions from $C[0,1]$ to $\mathbf{R}$ (with the usual metric) are continuous?

(a) $g(f) = \int_{0}^{1}fk$ where $k$ is some fixed function in
$C[0,1]$.

**Proof**:

$$ 
g(f_1) - f(f_2) =
\int_{0}^{1} f_1 k - \int_{0}^{1} f_2 k \\
= \int_{0}^{1} (f_1 - f_2) k
$$

Since $k$ is a fixed function in $C[0,1]$, then it's continuous.
We can assume $|k| \leq M$. Then if $d_1(f_1, f_2) < \epsilon / M$,

$$ 
|g(f_1) - f(f_2)| =
\left| \int_{0}^{1} (f_1 - f_2) k \right|
\leq 
\int_{0}^{1} | (f_1 - f_2) k | < \int_{0}^{1} \epsilon / M \cdot M
= \epsilon
$$

So $g$ is continuous.

$\square$

(b) $g(f) = f(1/2)$.

**Proof**: Let $d_1(f_1, f_2) < \epsilon$,
then

$$ 
|g(f_1) - g(f_2)| = |f_1(1/2) - f_2(1/2)|
\leq d_1(f_1, f_2) < \epsilon
$$

$\square$

(c) $g(f) = f(1/2)$, but this time with respect to the metric on
$C[0,1]$ from  Exercise 8.2.2 (c).

**Proof**: Let

$$ 
f_n(x) = \begin{cases}
    nx - n(1/2 - 1/n) &\text{if } 1/2 - 1/n \leq x \leq 1/2 \\
    -n x + n (1/2 + 1/n) &\text{if } 1/2 \leq x \leq 1/2 + 1/n \\
    0 & \text{otherwise }
\end{cases} 
$$

Note the $f_n$'s shape is a triangle centered at $1/2$ with a height
of $n$.

Let $f = 0$,

$$ 
d_1(f_n, f) = \int_{0}^{1} | f_n - f |
= \int_{0}^{1} f_n = \frac{1}{n} \rightarrow 0
$$

But $g(f_n) - g(f) = f_n(1/2) - f(1/2) = 1 - 0 = 1$.

$\square$

### Topology on Metric Spaces

***Definition 8.2.6.*** Given $ϵ > 0$ and an element $x$ in the metric 
space $(X,d)$, the $ϵ$-neighborhood of $x$ is the set
$V_ϵ(x) = \{y ∈ X : d(x,y) < ϵ\}$.

### Exercise 8.2.7. 

Describe the $ϵ$-neighborhoods in $\mathbf{R}^2$ for each of the 
diﬀerent metrics described in Exercise 8.2.1. How about for the 
discrete metric?

**Solution**:

(a) $d(x,y) = \sqrt[]{(x_1−y_1)^2 +(x_2−y_2)^2}$.

The $ϵ$-neighborhood of $x$ is a cicle of radius $\epsilon$ centered
at $x$.

(b) $d(x,y) = \max \{|x_1−y_1|,|x_2−y_2|\}.$

The $ϵ$-neighborhood of $x$ is a square with edge length $2 \epsilon$ centered
at $x$.

(c) the discrete metric.

The $ϵ$-neighborhood of $x$ is only itself if $ϵ < 1$.
It's $X$ if $ϵ \geq 1$.

$\square$

### *open sets*, *limit points*, and *closed sets*

With the definition of an $ϵ$-neighborhood, we can now define open 
sets, limit points, and closed sets exactly as we did before.

* A set $O ⊆ X$ is open if for every $x ∈ O$ we can find a 
  neighborhood $V_ϵ(x) ⊆ O$.
* A point $x$ is a limit point of a set $A$ if every $V_ϵ(x)$ 
  intersects $A$ in some point other than $x$.
* A set $C$ is closed if it contains its limit points.

### Exercise 8.2.8.

Let $(X,d)$ be a metric space.

(a) Verify that a typical $ϵ$-neighborhood $V_ϵ(x)$ is an open set.
Is the set

$$ 
C_{\epsilon}(x) = \{y \in X: d(x,y) \leq \epsilon \}
$$

a closed set

**Proof**: Let $y \in V_{\epsilon}(x)$, and $\delta = \epsilon - d(x,y) > 0$. Consider $z \in V_{\delta}(y)$.

$$ 
d(z, x) \leq d(z, y) + d(y, x)
\leq \delta + d(y,x) = \epsilon - d(y,x) + d(y,x) = \epsilon
$$

So $z \in V_{\epsilon}(x)$, so $V_{\delta}(y) \subseteq V_{\epsilon}(x)$, then $V_{\epsilon}(x)$ is an open set.

Assume $d(x,y) > \epsilon$, we want to show $y$ is not a limit point 
of $C_{\epsilon}(x)$.

Let $\delta = \frac{d(x,y)-\epsilon }{2}$, consider
$V_{\delta}(y)$, and let $z \in V_{\delta}(y)$.

if $z \in C_{\epsilon}(x)$, then

$$ 
d(x, y) \leq d(x,z) + d(z,y) \leq \epsilon + \delta
< \epsilon + 2 \delta  = d(x,y)
$$

We got a contradiction. So $z \not\in C_{\epsilon}(x)$.
Then $V_{\delta}(y) \cap C_{\epsilon}(x) = \emptyset$, i.e.
$y$ is not a limit point of $C_{\epsilon}(x)$.
So $C_{\epsilon}(x)$ is a closed set.

$\square$

(b) Show that a set $E ⊆ X$ is open if and only if its complement is closed.

**Proof**:

$\Rightarrow$ Assume $E$ is open, and $x \in E$.
Then we can find $V_{\epsilon}(x) \subseteq E$.
So $V_{\epsilon}(x) \cap E^c = \emptyset$, so $x$ is
not a limit point of $E^c$. That means $E$ does not 
contain any limit point of $E^c$. So $E^c$ contains
all its limit point. So $E^c$ is closed.

$\Leftarrow$ Assume $E^c$ is closed. And $x \in E$.
Since it's not a limit point of $E^c$, we can find
$V_{\epsilon}(x) \cap E^c = \emptyset$.
So $V_{\epsilon}(x) \subseteq E$.
Then $E$ is open.

### Exercise 8.2.9.

(a) Show that the set $Y= \{f ∈ C[0,1] : |f|_∞ ≤ 1\}$ 
is closed in $C[0,1]$.

**Proof**: we can see that $Y = C_{1}(0)$, so it's closed.

(b) Is the set $T= \{f ∈ C[0,1] : f(0) = 0\}$ open, 
closed, or neither in $C[0,1]$?

**Proof**:

It's not open. Given $f \in T$, and $\epsilon > 0$.
Consider

$$ 
g = f + \frac{\epsilon}{2}(x-1)
$$

Then $d(f,g) = \sup \{ |\frac{\epsilon}{2}(x-1)| : x \in 
[0, 1] \} = \frac{\epsilon }{2}$.

So $g \in V_{\epsilon}(f)$, but $g \not\in T$.

On the other hand, it $g$ is a limit point of $T$,
then given $\epsilon$,
$|g(0)| \leq \sup \{ |f(x) - g(x)| : x \in [0,1]\} < \epsilon$.
So $g(0) = 0$, then $g \in T$.

$\square$

### Definition 8.2.7.

A subset $K$ of a metric space $(X,d)$ is compact if every
sequence in $K$ has a convergent subsequence that 
converges to a limit in $K$.

### Exercise 8.2.10.

(a) Supply a definition for bounded subsets of a metric
space $(X,d)$.

**Solution**: If a non empty subset $S$ of $(X,d)$ is
bounded, we can find $x \in S$ and a real number $d > 0$,
such that $S \subseteq V_{d}(x)$.

(b) Show that if $K$ is a compact subset of the metric 
space $(X,d)$, then $K$ is closed and bounded.

**Proof**:

Assume $K$ is not bounded, and let $x \in K$.
Let $x_{n} \in K$, such that $d(x_n, x) > n$.

We can find a subsequence of $(x_n)$ such that
$(x_{n_k})$ converges to $y \in K$.
Let $d = d(x, y)$, we can find $n_k$, such that
$n_k > d + 1$ and $d(y, x_{n_k}) < 1$.

Then

$$ 
d(x_{n_k}, x) \leq d(x_{n_k}, y) + d(y, x)
< 1 + d < n_k
$$

On the other hand, $d(x_{n_k}, x) > n_k$.
We have a contradiction.

So $K$ is bounded.

Assume $x \in K$ is a limit point of $K$.
Let $x_n \in K \cap V_{1/n}(x)$. So $(x_n) \rightarrow x$.
On the other hand, a subsequence $(x_{n_k}) \rightarrow c \in K$, so $c = x$. $x \in K$.

So K is closed.

(c) Show that $Y ⊆ C[0,1]$ from Exercise 8.2.9 (a) is 
closed and bounded but not compact.

**Solution**: Consider

$$ 
f_n = x^n
$$

$(f_n) \rightarrow f$ is not continuous. So $Y$ is
not compact.

$\square$

### Definition 8.2.8.

Given a subset $E$ of a metric space $(X,d)$, the closure 
$E$ is the union of $E$ together with its limit points. 
The interior of $E$ is denoted by
$E^◦$ and is defined as

$$ 
E^◦
=
\{x ∈ E : \text{ there exists }V_ϵ(x) ⊆ E\}.
$$

### Exercise 8.2.11.

(a) Show that $E$ is closed if and only if $E = \overline{E}$. Show that $E$ is open if and only if $E^o = E$.

**Proof**: 

$\Rightarrow$ $E$ is closed.
Apparantly, $\overline{E} \supseteq E$.
Since $E$ has all its limit points, so
$\overline{E} \subseteq E$. So $\overline{E} = E$.

$\Leftarrow$ if $x$ is a limit point of $E$,
then $x \in \overline{E} = E$. so $E$ is closed.

The second part.

$\Rightarrow$ $E$ is open.
Apparantly, $E^o \subseteq E$. If $x \in E$, then
we can find $V_ϵ(x) ⊆ E$. Then $x \in E^o$.
So $E^o \supseteq E$. Then $E^o = E$.

$\Leftarrow$ If $x \in E = E^o$, we can find
$V_ϵ(x) ⊆ E$. So $E$ is open.

$\square$

(b) Show that $\overline{E}^c = (E^c)^o$,
and similarly that $(E^o)^c = \overline{E^c}$.

**Proof**:

First part.

* $\overline{E}^c \subseteq (E^c)^o$.

$x \in \overline{E}^c$, then $x \in E^c$ and is not a limit point of $E$. So we can find
$V_ϵ(x) \cap E = \emptyset$, i.e.
$V_ϵ(x) ⊆ E^c$. So $x \in (E^c)^o$.

* $\overline{E}^c \supseteq (E^c)^o$.

$x \in (E^c)^o$. Then we can find $V_ϵ(x) ⊆ E^c$. So
$x$ is not a limit point of $E$. Also $(E^c)^o ⊆ E^c$,
so $x \not\in E$. then $x \not\in \overline{E}$.
Then $x \in (\overline{E})^c$. 

Second part.

* $(E^o)^c \subseteq \overline{E^c}$.

$x \in (E^o)^c$, then $x \not\in E^o$. For any
$V_ϵ(x)$, $V_ϵ(x) \not \subseteq E$, i.e.
$V_ϵ(x) \cap E^c \neq \emptyset$, then either $x \in E^c$,
or $x$ is a limit point of $E^c$. Either way,
$x \in \overline{E^c}$.
Then $(E^o)^c \subseteq \overline{E^c}$.

* $(E^o)^c \supseteq \overline{E^c}$.

$x$ in $\overline{E^c}$. If $x \in E^c$, then $x \not\in E$, so $x \not\in E^o$. So $x \in (E^o)^c$.

If $x$ is a limit point of $E^c$. Then for all
$V_ϵ(x)$, $V_ϵ(x) \cap E^c \neq \emptyset$. Then
$V_ϵ(x) \not \subseteq E$. So
$x \not\in E^o$. Then $x \in (E^o)^c$.
Then $(E^o)^c \supseteq \overline{E^c}$.

$\square$

### Exercise 8.2.12.

(a) Show

$$ 
\overline{V_ϵ(x)} \subseteq
\{
y \in X : d(x,y) \leq \epsilon
\},
$$

in an arbitrary metric space $(X,d)$.

**Proof**:

Let $A = \{y \in X : d(x,y) \leq \epsilon\}$.
If $x \in V_ϵ(x)$, then $d(x,y) < \epsilon \subseteq A$.

If $x$ is a limit point of $V_ϵ(x)$. Then it's a limit
point of $A$. We have proved in exercise 8.2.8 (a),
that $A$ is a closed set. So $x \in A$.
That means $\overline{V_ϵ(x)} \subseteq A$.

(b) To keep things from sounding too familiar, find an 
example of a specific metric space where

$$ 
\overline{V_ϵ(x)} \neq 
\{
y \in X : d(x,y) \leq \epsilon
\}
$$

**Proof**:

Consider the discrete metric. $V_1(x) = \{x\}$.
But $\{y \in X : d(x,y) \leq \epsilon\} = X$.

$\square$

### Definition 8.2.9.

A set $A ⊆ X$ is dense in the metric space $(X,d)$ if
$\overline{A} = X$.
A subset $E$ of a metric space $(X,d)$ is nowhere-dense in 
$X$ if $E^o$ is empty.

### Exercise 8.2.13.

If $E$ is a subset of a metric space $(X,d)$, show that $E$ is nowhere-dense in $X$ if and only if $\overline{E}^c$ is dense in $X$.

**Proof**:

$\Rightarrow$ Assume $E$ is nowhere-dense in $X$.

So $\overline{E}^o = \emptyset$, then $(\overline{E}^o)^c = X$.


From exercise 8.2.11,
$(\overline{E}^o)^c = \overline{(\overline{E}^c)}$.

So we have $\overline{E}^c$ is dense.

$\Leftarrow$ Assume $\overline{E}^c$ is dense in X.

Then $\overline{(\overline{E}^c)} = X$, so
$(\overline{E}^o)^c = X$, then $\overline{E}^o$ is
empty. So $E$ is nowhere-dense in $X$.

$\square$

### The Baire Category Theorem

### Theorem 8.2.10.

Let $(X,d)$ be a complete metric space, and let ${O_n}$ be a
countable collection of dense, open subsets of $X$. Then,
$\cap_{n=1}^{\infty} O_n$ is not empty.

**Proof**:

Pick $x_1 \in O_1$.
Because $O_1$ is open, there exists an $ϵ_1 > 0$ such that
$V_{ϵ_1} (x_1) ⊆ O_1$.

### Exercise 8.2.14.

(a) Give the details for why we know there exists a point
$x_2 \in V_{ϵ_1} (x_1) \cap O_2$ and an $ϵ_2 > 0$
satisfying $ϵ_2 < ϵ_1/2$ with $V_{ϵ_2} (x_2)$ contained
in $O_2$ and

$$ 
\overline{V_{ϵ_2} (x_2)} \subseteq V_{ϵ_1} (x_1).
$$

**Proof**:

Since $O_2$ is dense, then $\overline{O_2} = X$.
Assume $V_{ϵ_1} (x_1) \cap O_2 = \emptyset$, and
let $x_2$ be an arbitrary point in $V_{ϵ_1} (x_1)$.
Then $x_2$ is a limit point of $O_2$, for every
$V_{ϵ_2} (x_2)$, $V_{ϵ_2} (x_2) \cap O_2 \neq \emptyset$.

But since $x_2 \in V_{ϵ_1} (x_1)$ and
$V_{ϵ_1} (x_1) \cap O_2 = \emptyset$, so we can find
a $V_{ϵ_2} (x_2)$, $V_{ϵ_2} (x_2) \cap O_2 = \emptyset$.

We have a contradiction.

Since both $O_2, V_{ϵ_1} (x_1)$ are open,
we have $O_2 \cap V_{ϵ_1} (x_1)$ is open. So we can find
$V_{ϵ_2'} (x_2) \subseteq O_2 \cap V_{ϵ_1} (x_1)$.

Let $ϵ_2 = ϵ_2'/2$. From exercise 8.2.12 (a)

$$ 
\overline{V_{ϵ_2} (x_2)} \subseteq
C_{ϵ_2} (x_2) \subseteq V_{ϵ_2'} (x_2)
\subseteq O_2 \cap V_{ϵ_1} (x_1)
$$

$\square$

(b) Proceed along this line and use the completeness of
$(X,d)$ to produce a single point $x ∈ O_n$ for every
$n ∈ N$.

**Proof**: We produced a sequence of closed set

$$ 
\overline{V_{ϵ_1} (x_1)} \supseteq
\overline{V_{ϵ_2} (x_2)} \supseteq
\overline{V_{ϵ_3} (x_3)} \supseteq
\cdots
$$

Consider the sequence $(x_n)$. It's a Cauchy sequence,
since $ϵ_{n+1} < ϵ_n / 2$.
Then $(x_n) \rightarrow x$, so $x$ is a limit point of
all $V_{ϵ_n} (x_n)$, then
$x \in \overline{V_{ϵ_n} (x_n)} \subseteq O_n$ for every
$n ∈ N$.

$\square$

### Theorem 8.2.11 (Baire Category Theorem).

A complete metric space is not the union of a countable 
collection of nowhere-dense sets.

### Exercise 8.2.15.

Complete the proof of the theorem.

**Proof**: Consider $\{E_n\}$ is a countable 
collection of nowhere-dense sets.

We consider

$$ 
O_n = (E_n^c)^o
$$

From exercise 8.2.11, $(E_n^c)^o = \overline{E_n}^c$.
From exercise 8.2.13, since $E_n$ is nowhere dense in
$X$, then $\overline{E_n}^c$ is dense in $X$.
That is $O_n$ is dense. Since it's also open,
we can apply exercise 8.2.14., there exists $x \in O_n$
for all $n \in \mathbf{N}$.
Then $x \not\in \cup E_n$.

$\square$

* This result is called the Baire Category Theorem 
because it creates two categories of size for subsets in 
a metric space. A set of “first category” is one
that can be written as a countable union of nowhere-dense 
sets. These are the small, intuitively thin subsets of a 
metric space. We now see that if our metric
space is complete, then it is necessarily of “second 
category,” meaning it cannot
be written as a countable union of nowhere-dense sets.

### Theorem 8.2.12.

The set 

$$ 
D = \{
f \in C[0,1]: f'(x) \text{ exists for some } x \in [0,1]
\}
$$

is a set of first category in $C[0,1]$.

**Proof**: For each pair of natural numbers $m,n$, define

$$ 
A_{m,n} =
\left\{ 
f \in C[0,1] : \text{ there exists } x \in [0,1]
\text{ where }
\left| 
  \frac{f(x) - f(t)}{x-t} \leq n
 \right| 
\text{ whenever }
0 < |x-t| < \frac{1}{m}
\right\} 
$$

The set $A_{m,n}$ contains any function in $C[0,1]$ for 
which it is possible to find at least one point $x$ where 
the slopes through $(x,f(x))$ and points on the function
nearby—within $1/m$ to be precise—are bounded by $n$.

### Exercise 8.2.16.

Show that if $f ∈ C[0,1]$ is diﬀerentiable at a point
$x ∈ [0,1]$, then $f ∈ A_{m,n}$ for some pair $m,n ∈ \mathbf{N}$.

**Proof**:

If $f$ is differentiable at $x$, then let $f'(x) = c$.
pick $n > |c|$ and $d = n - |c|$, we can find $\delta$
such that if $|t-x| < \delta$

$$
\left| 
  \frac{f(t)-f(x)}{t-x} - c
\right| < d
$$

So

$$ 
\left| 
\frac{f(t)-f(x)}{t-x}
\right| < d+|c| = n
$$

Also let $1/m < \delta$.

$\square$

* Fix $m$ and $n$. The first order of business is to 
prove that $A_{m,n}$ is a closed set. To this end, let $(f_k)$ be a sequence in $A_{m,n}$ and assume
$(f_k) \rightarrow f \in C[0,1]$. We need to show
$f ∈ A_{m,n}$.
* Because $f_k \in A_{m,n}$ then for each $k ∈ N$ there exists a point $x_k ∈ [0,1]$ where

$$ 
\left| 
\frac{
  f_k(x_k) - f_k(t)
}{x_k - t}
 \right| \leq n
\text{ for all }
0 < |x_k - t| < 1/m
$$

### Exercise 8.2.17.

(a) The sequence $(x_k)$ does not necessarily converge, but explain why there exists a subsequence
$(x_{k_l})$ that is convergent. Let
$x = \lim(x_{k_l}).$

**Proof**: This is because $(x_k)$ is bounded, so it must
have convergent subsequence.

$\square$

(b) Prove that $f_{k_l}(x_{k_l}) \rightarrow f(x)$.

**Proof**: Since $(f_k) \rightarrow f$, we can find
$N_1$, if $k_l > N_1$, $d(f_{k_l}, f) < \epsilon / 2$.
Since $(x_{k_l}) \rightarrow x$, and $f$ is continuous,
we can find $N_2$, if $k_l > N_2$, then
$|f(x_{k_l}) - f(x)| < \epsilon / 2$.
Then let $N = \max \{N_1, N_2\}$. If $k_l > N$

$$ 
|f_{k_l}(x_{k_l}) - f(x)|
\leq |f_{k_l}(x_{k_l}) - f(x_{k_l})| +
|f(x_{k_l}) - f(x)|
< \epsilon / 2 + \epsilon / 2 = \epsilon
$$
$\square$

(c) Now finish the proof that $A_{m,n}$ is closed.

**Proof**:

Fix $t$, such that $0 < |x-t| < 1/m$. We can find $N$,
such that $k_l > N$, then $0 < |x_{k_l} - t | < 1/m$.

$$ 
\left| 
\frac{f(x_{k_l}) - f(t)}{x_{k_l}-t}\right| \leq n
$$

Then

$$
\lim_{k_l \to \infty}
\left| 
\frac{f(x_{k_l}) - f(t)}{x_{k_l}-t}
\right| =
\left| 
\frac{f(x) - f(t)}{x-t}
\right|
\leq n
$$

$\square$

### Exercise 8.2.18.

A continuous function is called polygonal if its graph 
consists of a finite number of line segments.

(a) Show that there exists a polygonal function
$p \in C[0,1]$ satisfying
$\left\| f-p \right\|_{\infty} < \epsilon / 2$.

**Proof**: We have proved a similar result in
exercise 6.7.2. So we just copy the proof here and
replace $[a,b]$ with $[0,1]$.

Since $f$ is continuous on $[0, 1]$, then $f$ is uniformly
continuous on $[0, 1]$, so we can find $\delta$, as long as
$\left| x - y \right| < \delta$, $\left| f(x) - f(y) \right| < \epsilon/4$.

Then we can find 

$$ 
0 = x_0 < x_1 < x_2 < \cdots < x_{n} = 1
$$

such that $x_{i+1} - x_i < \delta$

Assume $c \in [x_{i}, x_{i+1}]$

$$ 
\left| f(c) - p (c) \right| \leq 
|f(c) - f(x_i)| + |f(x_i) - p (x_i)| + |p (x_i) - p (c)|
\leq \\
|f(c) - f(x_i)| + |f(x_i) - p (x_i)| + |p (x_i) - p (x_{i+1})| \\
= |f(c) - f(x_i)| + 0 + |f(x_i) - f(x_{i+1})| \\
< \epsilon /2 + 0 + \epsilon / 2 = \epsilon 
$$

$\square$

(b) Show that if $h$ is any function in $C[0,1]$ that is bounded by $1$, then the function

$$ 
g(x) = p(x) + \frac{\epsilon }{2} h(x)
$$

satisfies $g ∈ V_ϵ(f)$.

**Proof**:

$$ 
\left| g(x) - f(x) \right| =
\left| p(x) + \frac{\epsilon }{2} h(x) -f(x) \right|
\leq
\left| f(x) - p(x) \right| + \left| \frac{\epsilon }{2} h(x) \right|
\\
< \epsilon / 2 + \epsilon / 2 = \epsilon
$$

$\square$

(c) Construct a polygonal function $h(x)$ in $C[0,1]$ that is 
bounded by $1$ and leads to the conclusion $g \not\in A_{m,n}$,
where $g$ is defined as in (b).
Explain how this completes the argument for Theorem 8.2.12.

**Proof**:

Since $p$ is polygonal, then assume $p$ can be divided to $n$
segments,

$$ 
0 = x_0 < x_1 < x_2 < \cdots < x_{n} = 1
$$

In each segment, $p(x) = a_i x + b_i$. Choose an even integer
$r \in \mathbf{N}$, such that $\frac{\epsilon}{2} \cdot r - |a_i| > n$.
Then construct a periodic triangle function with period of
$2/r$. This is the first period.

$$ 
h(x) = \begin{cases}
  rx &\text{if } 0 \leq x < 1/r \\
  -rx + 2 &\text{if } 1/r \leq x < 2/r \\
\end{cases} 
$$

Then in each segment of $[x_{i-1}, x_i]$, the slop is either
$\frac{\epsilon}{2} \cdot r + a_i$ or
$-\frac{\epsilon}{2} \cdot r - a_i$.
In any case, the slop is bigger than $n$.

So $g \not\in A_{m,n}$.

If $f \in A_{m,n}$, then $f \not\in A_{m,n}^o$, because
for any $V_ϵ(f)$, we can find $g \in V_ϵ(f)$, such that
$g \not\in A_{m,n}$. So $A_{m,n}^o$ is an empty set.
Also since $A_{m,n} = \overline{A_{m,n}}$, then
$\overline{A_{m,n}}^o$ is empty.
So $A_{m,n}$ is nowhere dense. Together with Exercise 8.2.16.,
$D$ is the union a countable union of nowhere-dense sets.

$\square$
